Rewrite validators documentation (#11060)
pydantic/pydantic: docs/concepts/validators.md

While Pydantic provides many capabilities to add [validation constraints](./fields.md#field-constraints)

> to fields, you can define custom validators for specific fields or for the whole model.

Author: I think you forgot the crosslink targets

> to fields, you can define custom validators for specific fields or for the whole model.

Reviewer: Didn't mean to cross link here, just giving options for what we could insert. Sorry, syntax was unclear. So could either be:

In addition to Pydantic's built-in validation capabilities, you can leverage custom validators at the field and model levels to ensure the integrity of your data.

OR

In addition to Pydantic's built-in validation capabilities, you can leverage custom validators at the field and model levels to enforce more complex constraints.

OR, include both.

In addition to Pydantic's built-in validation capabilities, you can leverage custom validators at the field and model levels to enforce more complex constraints and ensure the integrity of your data.

!!! tip
    Want to quickly jump to the relevant validator definition?

    <div class="grid cards" markdown>

    -   Field validators

        ---

        - [*after* field validators](#field-after-validator)
        - [*before* field validators](#field-before-validator)
        - [*plain* field validators](#field-plain-validator)
        - [*wrap* field validators](#field-wrap-validator)

    -   Model validators

        ---

        - [*before* model validators](#model-before-validator)

>         - [*wrap* model validators](#model-wrap-validator)

Reviewer: Missing `after`

    </div>

## Field validators

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.functional_validators.WrapValidator`][pydantic.functional_validators.WrapValidator]<br>
    [`pydantic.functional_validators.PlainValidator`][pydantic.functional_validators.PlainValidator]<br>
    [`pydantic.functional_validators.BeforeValidator`][pydantic.functional_validators.BeforeValidator]<br>
    [`pydantic.functional_validators.AfterValidator`][pydantic.functional_validators.AfterValidator]<br>
    [`pydantic.functional_validators.field_validator`][pydantic.functional_validators.field_validator]<br>

In its simplest form, a field validator is a callable taking the value to be validated as an argument and
returning the validated value. The callable can perform checks for specific conditions (see
[raising validation errors](#raising-validation-errors)) and make changes to the validated value.

**Four** different types of validators can be used. They can all be defined using the
[annotated pattern](./fields.md#the-annotated-pattern) or using the
[`field_validator()`][pydantic.field_validator] decorator, applied on a [class method][classmethod]:

[](){#field-after-validator}

> - __*After* validators__: they run after Pydantic's internal validation. They are generally more type safe and thus easier to implement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __*After* validators__: run after Pydantic's internal validation. These are generally more type safe and thus easier to implement.
```

    === "Annotated pattern"

        Here is an example of a validator performing a validation check, and returning the value unchanged.

        ```python
        from typing_extensions import Annotated

        from pydantic import AfterValidator, BaseModel, ValidationError

        def is_even(value: int) -> int:
            if value % 2 == 1:
                raise ValueError(f'{value} is not an even number')
            return value  # (1)!

        class Model(BaseModel):
            number: Annotated[int, AfterValidator(is_even)]

        try:
            Model(number=1)
        except ValidationError as err:
            print(err)
            """
            1 validation error for Model
            number
              Value error, 1 is not an even number [type=value_error, input_value=1, input_type=int]
            """
        ```

>         1. Note that it is important to return the validated value.

Reviewer: I think this is worth an admonition, generally, in the validators section. Keeping the annotation is good as well. I think a little bit of redundancy here doesn't hurt.

Author: We already state

> In its simplest form, a field validator is a callable taking the value to be validated as an argument and
returning the validated value.

I can maybe emphasize on _returning the validated value_.

Reviewer: Let's emphasize, and if we get more questions in issues, let's add an admonition.

    === "Decorator"

        Here is an example of a validator making changes to the validated value (no exception is raised),

>         this time using the [`field_validator()`][pydantic.field_validator] decorator.

Reviewer: As mentioned on our call, I think the examples provided in the tabs should be analogous so that it's easy to understand the parallels between annotated validators and validators via decoration.

That being said, I think both concepts here are important, so I don't think we should delete this example. Happy to chat more about where it might go.

Reviewer: What if we added a collapsable section with another example so that it stays localized on this page but doesn't consume too much space?

        ```python
        from pydantic import BaseModel, field_validator

        class Model(BaseModel):
            number: int

            @field_validator('number', mode='after')  # (1)!
            @classmethod
            def double_number(cls, value: int) -> int:
                return value * 2

        print(Model(number=2))
        #> number=4
        ```

        1. `'after'` is the default mode for the decorator, and can be omitted.

[](){#field-before-validator}

> - __*Before* validators__: they run before Pydantic's internal parsing and validation (e.g. coercion of a `str` to an `int`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __*Before* validators__: run before Pydantic's internal parsing and validation (e.g. coercion of a `str` to an `int`).
```

>   These are more flexible than *after* validators, but they also have to deal with the raw input, which in theory could be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  These are more flexible than *[after* validators](#field-after-validator), but they also carry the burden of dealing with the raw input, which in theory could be
```

>   any arbitrary object. Once the validator has been called, the returned value from the callable is validated against
>   the type annotation by Pydantic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  any arbitrary object. The value returned from this callable is then validated against the provided type annotation by Pydantic.
```

    === "Annotated pattern"

        ```python
        from typing import Any

        from typing_extensions import Annotated

        from pydantic import BaseModel, BeforeValidator, ValidationError

        def from_hex(value: Any) -> Any:  # (1)!
            if isinstance(value, str):
                return int(value, 16)
            else:
                return value

        class Model(BaseModel):
            number: Annotated[int, BeforeValidator(from_hex)]

        print(Model(number="ea78d"))
        #> number=960397
        print(Model(number=123))
        #> number=123

        try:
            Model(number=b"invalid bytes type")
        except ValidationError as err:
            print(err)  # (2)!
            """
            1 validation error for Model
            number
              Input should be a valid integer, unable to parse string as an integer [type=int_parsing, input_value=b'invalid bytes type', input_type=bytes]
            """
        ```

>         1. Notice the use of [`Any`][typing.Any] as a type hint. *Before* validators take the raw input, which
>            can be anything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        1. Notice the use of [`Any`][typing.Any] as a type hint for `value`. *Before* validators take the raw input, which
           can be anything.
```

        2. Pydantic still performs validation against the `int` type, no matter if our `from_hex` validator
           did operations on the original input type.

    === "Decorator"

        ```python
        from typing import Any, List

        from pydantic import BaseModel, field_validator

        class Model(BaseModel):
            numbers: List[int]

            @field_validator('numbers', mode='before')
            @classmethod
            def ensure_list(cls, value: Any) -> Any:
                if not isinstance(value, list):  # (1)!
                    return [value]
                else:

>                     return value

Reviewer: This is a **great** example of a before validator in context

        print(Model(numbers=2))
        #> numbers=[2]
        ```

        1. Note that you might want to check for other sequence types (such as tuples) that would normally successfully
           validate against the `list` type. *Before* validators give you more flexibility, but you have to account for
           every possible case.

[](){#field-plain-validator}

> - __*Plain* validators__: they act similarly to *before* validators but they **terminate validation immediately**, no further

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __*Plain* validators__: act similarly to *before* validators but they **terminate validation immediately** after returning, so no further
```

            if isinstance(value, int):
                return value * 2
            else:
                return value

        class Model(BaseModel):
            number: Annotated[int, PlainValidator(val_number)]

        print(Model(number=4))
        #> number=8
        print(Model(number='invalid'))  # (1)!
        #> number='invalid'
        ```

        1. Although `'invalid'` shouldn't validate against the `int` type, Pydantic accepts the input.

    === "Decorator"

        ```python
        from typing import Any

        from pydantic import BaseModel, field_validator

        class Model(BaseModel):
            number: int

            @field_validator('number', mode='plain')
            @classmethod
            def val_number(cls, value: Any) -> Any:
                if isinstance(value, int):
                    return value * 2
                else:
                    return value

        print(Model(number=4))
        #> number=8
        print(Model(number='invalid'))  # (1)!
        #> number='invalid'
        ```

        1. Although `'invalid'` shouldn't validate against the `int` type, Pydantic accepts the input.

[](){#field-wrap-validator}

> - __*Wrap* validators__: they are the most flexible of all. You can run code before or after Pydantic and other validators

Reviewer: Ok, so given that we are in the concepts section, I think this would be a great place to add a sentence or two explaining what the `handler` argument is (a callable that performs pydantic's internal validation, basically), and the fact that it must be specified as the second argument.

> - __*Wrap* validators__: they are the most flexible of all. You can run code before or after Pydantic and other validators
>   process the input, or you can terminate validation immediately, either by returning the value early or by raising an
>   error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __*Wrap* validators__: are the most flexible of all. You can run code before or after Pydantic and other validators
  process the input. Wrap validators also have the power to terminate validation immediately, either by returning the value early or by raising an error.
```

Should we make a joke about "with great power comes great responsibility?

        from typing_extensions import Annotated

        from pydantic import BaseModel, Field, ValidationError, ValidatorFunctionWrapHandler, field_validator

        class Model(BaseModel):
            my_string: Annotated[str, Field(max_length=5)]

            @field_validator('my_string', mode='wrap')
            @classmethod
            def truncate(cls, value: Any, handler: ValidatorFunctionWrapHandler) -> str:  # (1)!
                try:
                    return handler(value)
                except ValidationError as err:
                    if err.errors()[0]['type'] == 'string_too_long':
                        return handler(value[:5])
                    else:
                        raise

        print(Model(my_string='abcde'))
        #> my_string='abcde'
        print(Model(my_string='abcdef'))
        #> my_string='abcde'
        ```

        1. Unlike the other validator types, *wrap* validators must be defined with a second `handler` argument,
           even if they don't make use of it.

!!! note "Validation of default values"
    As mentioned in the [fields documentation](./fields.md#validate-default-values), default values of fields

>     are *not* validated by default, and thus custom validators will not be applied as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    are *not* validated by default, and thus custom validators are also not applied to default values by default.
```

This is a lot of "default default default", is there a better way we can phrase this?

Author: Rephrased to _default values of fields are not validated unless configured to do so_ (and the crosslink can be used to check how to do so).

> ### Using the annotated pattern or the decorators

Reviewer: I wonder if we should phrase this as a question, or maybe at least something like "Annotated validators vs decorators"

Author: Renamed to _### Which validator pattern to use_

> While both approaches can achieve the same thing, each implementation provide different benefits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While both approaches can achieve the same thing, each implementation provides different benefits.
```

#### Using the annotated pattern

One of the key benefits of using the [annotated pattern](./fields.md#the-annotated-pattern) is to make
validators reusable:

```python
from typing import List

from typing_extensions import Annotated

from pydantic import AfterValidator, BaseModel

def is_even(value: int) -> int:
    if value % 2 == 1:
        raise ValueError(f'{value} is not an even number')
    return value

EvenNumber = Annotated[str, AfterValidator(is_even)]

class Model1(BaseModel):
    my_number: EvenNumber

class Model2(BaseModel):
    other_number: Annotated[EvenNumber, AfterValidator(lambda v: v + 2)]

class Model3(BaseModel):
    list_of_even_numbers: List[EvenNumber]  # (1)!
```

> 1. As mentioned in the [annotated pattern](./fields.md#the-annotated-pattern) documentation,

Reviewer: I got a bit lost here at first, maybe specify, in this case, the list items, but not the whole list or something like that.

   we can also make use of validators for specific parts of the annotation.

It is also easier to understand which validators are applied to a type, by just looking at the field annotation.

> #### Using the decorator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Using the decorator pattern
```

```python
from pydantic import BaseModel, field_validator

class Model(BaseModel):
    f1: str
    f2: str

    @field_validator('f1', 'f2', mode='before')
    @classmethod
    def capitalize(cls, value: str) -> str:
        return value.capitalize()
```

Here are a couple additional notes about the decorator usage:

- If you want the validator to apply to all fields (including the ones defined in subclasses), you can pass
  `'*'` as the field name argument.
- By default, the decorator will ensure the provided field name(s) are defined on the model. If you want to
  disable this check during class creation, you can do so by passing `False` to the `check_fields` argument.
  This is useful when the field validator is defined on a base class, and the field is expected to be set
  on subclasses.

## Model validators

??? api "API Documentation"
    [`pydantic.functional_validators.model_validator`][pydantic.functional_validators.model_validator]<br>

Validation can also be performed on the entire model's data using the [`model_validator()`][pydantic.model_validator]
decorator.

**Three** different types of model validators can be used:

[](){#model-after-validator}

> - __*After* validators__: they run after the whole model has been validated. As such, they are defined as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __*After* validators__: run after the whole model has been validated. As such, they are defined as
```

>   *instance* methods and can be seen as post-initialization hooks. However, do note that the instance should
>   be returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  *instance* methods and can be seen as post-initialization hooks. Important note: the validated instance instance should
  be returned.
```

  ```python
  from typing_extensions import Self

  from pydantic import BaseModel, model_validator

  class UserModel(BaseModel):
      username: str
      password: str
      password_repeat: str

      @model_validator(mode='after')
      def check_passwords_match(self) -> Self:
          if self.password != self.password_repeat:
              raise ValueError('Passwords do not match')
          return self
  ```

[](){#model-before-validator}

> - __*Before* validators__: they are run before the model is instantiated. These are more flexible than *after* validators,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __*Before* validators__: are run before the model is instantiated. These are more flexible than *after* validators,
```

  but they also have to deal with the raw input, which in theory could be any arbitrary object.

  ```python
  from typing import Any

  from pydantic import BaseModel, model_validator

  class UserModel(BaseModel):
      username: str

      @model_validator(mode='before')
      @classmethod
      def check_card_number_not_present(cls, data: Any) -> Any:  # (1)!
          if isinstance(data, dict):  # (2)!
              if 'card_number' in data:
                  raise ValueError("'card_number' should not be included")
          return data
  ```

>   1. Notice the use of [`Any`][typing.Any] as a type hint. *Before* validators take the raw input, which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. Notice the use of [`Any`][typing.Any] as a type hint for `data`. *Before* validators take the raw input, which
```

     can be anything.
  2. Most of the time, the input data will be a dictionary (e.g. when calling `UserModel(username='...')`). However,
     this is not always the case. For instance, if the [`from_attributes`][pydantic.ConfigDict.from_attributes]
     configuration value is set, you might receive an arbitrary class instance for the `data` argument.

[](){#model-wrap-validator}

> - __*Wrap* validators__: they are the most flexible of all. You can run code before or after Pydantic and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __*Wrap* validators__: are the most flexible of all. You can run code before or after Pydantic and
```

  other validators process the input data, or you can terminate validation immediately, either by returning
  the data early or by raising an error.

  ```python {lint="skip"}
  import logging
  from typing import Any

  from typing_extensions import Self

  from pydantic import BaseModel, ModelWrapValidatorHandler, ValidationError, model_validator

  class UserModel(BaseModel):
      username: str

      @model_validator(mode='wrap')
      @classmethod
      def log_failed_validation(cls, data: Any, handler: ModelWrapValidatorHandler[Self]) -> Self:
          try:
              return handler(data)
          except ValidationError:
              logging.error('Model %s failed to validate with data %s', cls, data)
              raise
  ```

!!! note "On inheritance"
    A model validator defined in a base class will be called during the validation of a subclass instance.

    Overriding a model validator in a subclass will override the base class' validator, and thus only the subclass' version of said validator will be called.

## Raising validation errors

To raise a validation error, three types of exceptions can be used:

> - [`ValueError`][]: this is the most common exception to be raised inside validators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`ValueError`][]: this is the most common exception raised inside validators.
```

property. Here is an example than can be used as an alternative to the [*after* model validator](#model-after-validator)
example:

```python
from pydantic import BaseModel, ValidationInfo, field_validator

class UserModel(BaseModel):
    password: str
    password_repeat: str
    username: str

    @field_validator('password_repeat', mode='after')
    @classmethod
    def check_passwords_match(cls, value: str, info: ValidationInfo) -> str:
        if value != info.data['password']:
            raise ValueError('Passwords do not match')
        return value
```

!!! warning
    As validation is performed in the [order fields are defined](./models.md#field-ordering), you have to
    make sure you are not accessing a field that hasn't been validated yet. In the code above, for example,
    the `username` validated value is not available yet, as it is defined *after* `password_repeat`.

The [`data`][pydantic.ValidationInfo.data] property is `None` for [model validators](#model-validators).

### Validation context

You can pass a context object to the [validation methods](./models.md#validating-data), which can be accessed

> inside the validator functions using the [`context`][pydantic.ValidationInfo.context] property:

Reviewer: Maybe add a note about runtime / dynamic data here

Author: What do you mean by *runtime / dynamic data* exactly?

Reviewer: Ignore me, I don't think this is actually helpful to clarify here.
